# House of Representatives vs. Taxes Analysis Project


## **Introduction & Background** 

In general, I find politics very interesting. It's no secret that as a result of the last couple presidential elections, the US political climate has become a lot more polarized. Because of this increased bitterness between the Democratic and Republican party, the stereotypes associated with each party have deepened. People are quick to believe any and all accusations made toward the opposite party. Using these two datasets I am exploring two assumptions. Firstly, that more power to the democratic party results in a higher personal income tax. Secondly, that the power to te Republican party results in less taxation for businesses. These stereotypes are among the least controversial made about each party. However, I am still curious to see whether or not they hold true based on actual data. 

I used the following specific questions to explore these two assumptions based on the data available to me:

Question 1: The Democratic party is generally the party associated with higher income taxes. Is the average percentage of federal revenue from income tax actually higher when democrats have a house majority?
Question 2: Is there a positive correlation between amount of Republicans in power and the percent of federal revenue from corporate income taxes? 

In seeking the answers to these questions, I hope to generate some food for thought concerning whether or not the stereotypes that have been made so central to US politics have any truth to them. 

## **Methods**
### Datasets Used
This project involved combining two different datasets. 

The first dataset had detailed information about the percentages of representatives from each major political party in the house from 1946-2018. This dataset was generated by a company called Brookings, under their "Vital Statistics on Congress" umbrella. Using publicly available data, Thomas E. Mann of Brookings and Norman J. Ornstein of the American Enterprise Institute compliled this data, making it more usable to the public. 

The second dataset contained data on the percent federal revenue from different types of taxes from 1934-2012. This dataset is from the Tax Foundation. They compiled this data using publicly available tax archives from the whitehouse via the www.whitehouse.gov website. 
### Coding Process
Certain pieces of information were key to answering both of the questions. From both datasets, the year of the corresponding data needed to be tracked in order to match the correct pieces of data across datasets. Furthermore, the percentage of democrats in the house of those years needed to be tracked (the republican percentage could be obtained by doig 100 - democratic percentage). 

Specifically for research question 1, the "Individual Income Tax" file needed to be accessed from the tax dataset. For research question 2, the "Corporate Income Tax" file needed to be accessed form the tax dataset. 

One issue that came up was that the datasets did not align in their range of years. This made them harder to compare to eachother. I resolved this issue by further generalizing my code and making minYear and maxYear a parameter to my method. This way, the code would only grab the data from years within the range of both datasets. This issues was resolved by making minYear and maxYear a parameter for the major methods. This way, the code would only grab data relating to acceptable years. Another issue I faced was that the method calculating the correlation coefficient became overly long and complicated to the point that I became "lost" in my own code. I reconciled this issue by dividing up the tasks by creating submethods for this research question. Finally, a really big issue that I had was that my two initial research questions both compared the Average Percent Federal Revenue from a specific type of income tax. After I parameterized my first method, I realized that I could use the same method to answer both questions if I had taxType as a parameter. Therefore, I had to move away from my second research question, as it was too similar to my first. The "Research Question 2" that I have listed above is the new research question that I came up with. 

## **Conclusion**

Before entering into the results and conclusions made based on this data, a bit of a disclaimer is necessary. The data used in this project was limited in the sense that only data from the House of Representatives was used. The Senate, political affiliation of the President, the economy itself, acts of foreign nations, and countless other variables can influence the United States's taxation policy. These conclusions can only be seen in the context of the relationship of Representation in the House and the taxes. They do not necessarily mean that if a certain political party gains power that that alone will always result in a change in taxation polciies.

### Research Question 1:
According to the data, Democrats tax individuals at a slightly higher percentage when they are in power compared to Republicans. 

For the years where the Democratic party had power in the House, the Average Percent Federal Revenue from Individual Income Taxes was about 89.1%. The Republican party's Percent Federal Revenue from Individual Income Taxes during the same years was 85.9%. 


### Research Question 2:
The correlation coefficient between the Percentage of Democrats in Power and a Percentage of Corporate Income Taxes was .0339. This means that the correlation between the two are basically nonexistent. Thus, having a higher percentage of Democrats in Power in the house does not, on its own, cause the federal government to shift towards taxing businesses in a greater percentage. 

Based on the data I utilized, the amount of Democrats in the House does not cause Corporations to be taxed at a higher rate. 


### **Further Research**
Given more time, I would consider more variables in this comparison.  For instance, I would like to use data from the political makeup of the senate and the party of the president to help determine whether a year really is a year with more Democratic and Republican power. Furthermore, I would use more advanced libraries to graphically represent my data. 